---
layout: post
title: How To Teach Yourself Code.
---

  Teaching yourself to code can be an uphill struggle especially when starting out. People usually ask how long it will take to be an expert coder, i always have one reply; "as long as it will take". Sounds rather vague but in reality there's no actual time frame. It definitely takes immense dedication and discipline to make it past the first few months without giving up but the amount of time needed depends on how much daily effort you decide to put into it, someone putting in 12 hours a day is definitely going to get to 'expert' faster than one that puts in a measly 2 hours everyday.

Here today i want to share a few tips on how to make your coding adventure much more fruitful and productive;

1. As John Resig (creator of JQuery) always says -- <b>Code everyday</b> Really guys, code everyday, build the habit. This is what will keep you ever advancing in your coding career. "Code is slippery" a quote i frequently heard from [Frank Tamre](http:tamrefrank.com), the moment you stop coding sometimes even for a day, you begin to recede and lose your edge.
You dont have to be building a framework or some big project, pick up some module or a part of a small chunk of a big project or website and code it, make sure you engage in meaningful coding every single day. Just like muscle/body building -- the more you engage in it the better you become. [This](http://ejohn.org/blog/write-code-every-day) is a link to John Resig's blog post about Coding Everyday and how it changed his life as a developer.

2. <b>Be around people who code:</b> This is very essential in building intrinsic motivation, people, freinds, co-workers, mentors etc have a way of keeping you motivated even when you're just about to give up. You get to exchange ideas and learn from each other about techniques and ways of getting things done better.  Hanging around other coders also improves the quality of the code you write especially when there is some form of code review or peer programming. Go to meetups, hackathons and any place you sure know you'll find coders, you don't have to be there in person you can be part of online webinars and programmer groups over the internet. Interacting with more experienced coders goes a long way into shaping you as a programmer.

3. Take note that <b>the tool doesn't really matter:</b> This point has a slight correlation to another [blog post] a wrote a while ago about programming languages. One common trait about beginner programmers is the constant tendency to keep shifting camps i.e to be unfocused. Today they are programming in python and in 3 weeks time you see them writing Java code. Please know today that programming languages, frameworks, stacks and the likes are all tools used to accomplish different tasks. Once you have decided to start with a certain stack or framework or editor or anything try your best not to keep shifting camps and try not to waste time searching things like "what is the best programming language to learn" or "what's the best IDE or text editor to use" over and over again, doing that a few times is acceptable but once you've made a choice just stick to it. Wether is LAMP or MEAN you've decided to start with, many of the skills and knowledge are easily transferrable to the other. As it is popularly said "The grass is always greener on the other side.", you'll definitely meet someone who will try to sell you their programming language or framework or whatever, by all means ignore the distractions and hone your craft. It is better to be an expert at one thing than to be mediocre in a bunch of things.
If you haven't decided where you want to start in terms of programming language, I believe this [infographic](http://carlcheo.com/startcoding) will guide you in making a choice, but don't forget that once you've made a choice stick to it till you've acquired some level of mastery before switching.



Thank you for getting this far. Please share and post any suggestions, comments or questions in the comment section below. Thank you 😘
